editors/vscode/intent-lang/README.md, before:

# Intent Language for VS Code

Syntax highlighting and language support for the [Intent programming language](https://github.com/joshcramer/intent).

## Features

- **Syntax Highlighting** for `.intent` and `.itn` files
- **Code Snippets** for common patterns
- **Bracket Matching** and auto-closing
- **Comment Toggling** (line and block)
- **Folding** support

## Supported File Extensions

- `.intent` - Standard Intent source files
- `.itn` - Short form Intent source files

## Highlighting

The extension provides semantic highlighting for:

- **Keywords**: `fn`, `let`, `const`, `struct`, `impl`, `trait`, `enum`, etc.
- **Control Flow**: `if`, `else`, `while`, `for`, `match`, `return`, etc.
- **Contracts**: `requires`, `ensures`, `invariant`, `old`, `result`
- **Effects**: `pure`, `io`, `network`, `database`, `throws`
- **Types**: `Int`, `Float`, `String`, `Bool`, `Array`, `Option`, `Result`, etc.
- **Built-in Functions**: `print`, `len`, `map`, `filter`, `reduce`, etc.
- **Comments**: Line (`//`) and block (`/* */`)
- **Strings**: Double-quoted, single-quoted, and template strings

## Snippets

| Prefix    | Description                                |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| `fn`      | Function definition                        |
| `fnc`     | Function with contracts (requires/ensures) |
| `fnr`     | Function with return type                  |
| `struct`  | Struct definition                          |
| `structi` | Struct with invariant                      |
| `impl`    | Implementation block                       |
| `if`      | If-else statement                          |
| `while`   | While loop                                 |
| `for`     | For-in loop                                |
| `let`     | Let binding                                |
| `letm`    | Mutable let binding                        |
| `match`   | Match expression                           |
| `req`     | Requires clause                            |
| `ens`     | Ensures clause                             |
| `inv`     | Invariant clause                           |
| `old`     | Old value reference                        |
| `enum`    | Enum definition                            |
| `trait`   | Trait definition                           |
| `test`    | Test function                              |
| `pr`      | Print statement                            |
| `ass`     | Assert statement                           |

## Example

```intent
struct BankAccount {
    balance: Int,
    owner: String
}

impl BankAccount {
    invariant self.balance >= 0

    fn deposit(self, amount: Int)
        requires amount > 0
        ensures self.balance == old(self.balance) + amount
    {
        self.balance = self.balance + amount
    }

    fn withdraw(self, amount: Int) -> Bool
        requires amount > 0
        ensures result == true implies self.balance == old(self.balance) - amount
    {
        if self.balance >= amount {
            self.balance = self.balance - amount
            return true
        }
        return false
    }
}
```

## Installation

### From VS Code Marketplace

Search for "Intent Language" in the VS Code Extensions view.

### Manual Installation

1. Clone or download this extension
2. Copy the `intent-lang` folder to your VS Code extensions directory:
   - **Windows**: `%USERPROFILE%\.vscode\extensions`
   - **macOS**: `~/.vscode/extensions`
   - **Linux**: `~/.vscode/extensions`
3. Restart VS Code

### Development

```bash
# Package the extension
cd editors/vscode/intent-lang
npx vsce package

# Install locally
code --install-extension intent-lang-0.1.0.vsix
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see the [main Intent repository](https://github.com/joshcramer/intent) for guidelines.

## License

MIT License - see the Intent project for details.

Commit message:

Rename language from Intent to NTNT
- Binary renamed from 'intent' to 'ntnt'
- File extension unified to '.tnt' (replacing .intent and .itn)
- Updated Cargo.toml: package name, binary name, repo URL
- Updated all CLI branding: REPL shows 'NTNT (Intent) Programming Language'
- Updated all documentation: README, ARCHITECTURE, ROADMAP, LANGUAGE_SPEC
- Updated VS Code extension: package.json, README, CHANGELOG, syntax files
- Renamed all 22 example files from .intent/.itn to .tnt
- Updated all example file contents with NTNT references
- Updated src/ doc comments and module docs

The language is written as 'NTNT' but pronounced as 'Intent'.
Repository will be renamed from intent to ntnt on GitHub separately.

All 209 tests passing.

editors/vscode/intent-lang/README.md, after:

# NTNT Language for VS Code

Syntax highlighting and language support for the [NTNT programming language](https://github.com/joshcramer/ntnt) (pronounced "Intent").

## Features

- **Syntax Highlighting** for `.tnt` files
- **Code Snippets** for common patterns
- **Bracket Matching** and auto-closing
- **Comment Toggling** (line and block)
- **Folding** support

## Supported File Extensions

- `.tnt` - NTNT source files

## Highlighting

The extension provides semantic highlighting for:

- **Keywords**: `fn`, `let`, `const`, `struct`, `impl`, `trait`, `enum`, etc.
- **Control Flow**: `if`, `else`, `while`, `for`, `match`, `return`, etc.
- **Contracts**: `requires`, `ensures`, `invariant`, `old`, `result`
- **Effects**: `pure`, `io`, `network`, `database`, `throws`
- **Types**: `Int`, `Float`, `String`, `Bool`, `Array`, `Option`, `Result`, etc.
- **Built-in Functions**: `print`, `len`, `map`, `filter`, `reduce`, etc.
- **Comments**: Line (`//`) and block (`/* */`)
- **Strings**: Double-quoted, single-quoted, and template strings

## Snippets

| Prefix    | Description                                |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| `fn`      | Function definition                        |
| `fnc`     | Function with contracts (requires/ensures) |
| `fnr`     | Function with return type                  |
| `struct`  | Struct definition                          |
| `structi` | Struct with invariant                      |
| `impl`    | Implementation block                       |
| `if`      | If-else statement                          |
| `while`   | While loop                                 |
| `for`     | For-in loop                                |
| `let`     | Let binding                                |
| `letm`    | Mutable let binding                        |
| `match`   | Match expression                           |
| `req`     | Requires clause                            |
| `ens`     | Ensures clause                             |
| `inv`     | Invariant clause                           |
| `old`     | Old value reference                        |
| `enum`    | Enum definition                            |
| `trait`   | Trait definition                           |
| `test`    | Test function                              |
| `pr`      | Print statement                            |
| `ass`     | Assert statement                           |

## Example

```ntnt
struct BankAccount {
    balance: Int,
    owner: String
}

impl BankAccount {
    invariant self.balance >= 0

    fn deposit(self, amount: Int)
        requires amount > 0
        ensures self.balance == old(self.balance) + amount
    {
        self.balance = self.balance + amount
    }

    fn withdraw(self, amount: Int) -> Bool
        requires amount > 0
        ensures result == true implies self.balance == old(self.balance) - amount
    {
        if self.balance >= amount {
            self.balance = self.balance - amount
            return true
        }
        return false
    }
}
```

## Installation

### From VS Code Marketplace

Search for "NTNT Language" in the VS Code Extensions view.

### Manual Installation

1. Clone or download this extension
2. Copy the `intent-lang` folder to your VS Code extensions directory:
   - **Windows**: `%USERPROFILE%\.vscode\extensions`
   - **macOS**: `~/.vscode/extensions`
   - **Linux**: `~/.vscode/extensions`
3. Restart VS Code

### Development

```bash
# Package the extension
cd editors/vscode/intent-lang
npx vsce package

# Install locally
code --install-extension ntnt-lang-0.1.0.vsix
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see the [main NTNT repository](https://github.com/joshcramer/ntnt) for guidelines.

## License

MIT License - see the NTNT project for details.
